Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
In this lab we will practice some basic VLAN
configurations, specifically configuring access
ports on a Cisco switch, which is what was
covered in day 16’s lecture video.
As I said in that video, an access port belongs
to a single VLAN, and a switch won’t forward
frames between VLANs directly, it must send
it to a router first.
This network here is very much like the one
I used for the demonstration in the lecture
video, featuring three VLANs.
VLAN10, the engineering department, VLAN20,
the HR department, and VLAN30, the sales department.
Let’s get started with step 1.
First up, we must configure the correct IP
address and subnet mask on each PC, and we
must set the gateway address as the last usable
address of the subnet.
We will later configure that address on R1,
as it will be the default gateway for each
subnet.
So, let’s go on PC1 first.  From the config
tab, let’s enter the gateway address first.
The last usable address for PC1’s subnet
is 10.0.0.62, so that will be the default
gateway of the subnet, R1’s address.
Next, click on the network interface here, and
set the IP address of 10.0.0.1, hit tab, and
then adjust the subnet mask to 255.255.255.192,
because it’s a /26 subnet.
Okay, that’s all for PC1.
I’ll quickly run through the other PCs now.
PC2 is next.  Go to the config tab, gateway
address of 10.0.0.62.  Go to the network interface,
IP address of 10.0.0.2, and subnet mask of
255.255.255.192.
Okay, that’s all for the VLAN10 PCs, next
VLAN20.  So, I’ll go on PC3.  Config.
Set the gateway address of 10.0.0.126, the
last usable address of the subnet.
Then, configure the network interface, address
of 10.0.0.65, subnet mask 255.255.255.192.
Okay, now let’s go to PC4.  Config, gateway
address of 10.0.0.126, then let’s configure
fastethernet0.  IP address of 10.0.0.66, subnet
mask of 255.255.255.192.
Okay, those are the PCs in VLAN20.
Finally, let’s configure PC5 and PC6 in
VLAN30.  PC5 first.
In the config tab, set the gateway address to 10.0.0.190,
which is the last usable address of the subnet.
Then, set PC5’s IP address to 10.0.0.129,
and subnet mask of 255.255.255.192.
Okay, finally let’s go on PC6.  Set the gateway address
of 10.0.0.190, and PC6’s IP address is 10.0.0.130,
and the subnet mask is once again 255.255.255.192, or
/26.
Okay, so we’ve configured all of the PCs,
that’s step 1 complete.
Step 2 is to make three connections between
R1 and SW1, and configure one interface on
R1 for each VLAN.
So, I’ll click down here for the connections,
and select a straight through cable.
I’ve already put the interface labels on
the network diagram, SW1’s G0/1 to R1 G0/0, etc.
So, let’s do that.
SW1 G0/1 to R1 G0/0.  Next is SW1 G1/1 to R1 G0/1.  And
then SW1 G2/1 to R1 G0/2.
Okay, we’ve made three connections, now
let’s configure R1.  Hop on to the CLI,
and then enter privileged exec mode with ENABLE.
And then, global config mode with CONFIGURE TERMINAL.
Okay, I’ll configure G0/0 for VLAN10, G0/1
for VLAN20, and G0/2 for VLAN30.
So, INTERFACE G0/0.
We must assign the same IP addresses that
we configured as the gateway addresses for
each PC.
Here in VLAN10, that is IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.62
255.255.255.192.
Then, enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, next up G0/1.
INTERFACE G0/1.
The gateway address for VLAN20 is IP ADDRESS
10.0.0.126 255.255.255.192.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, now G0/2.
INTERFACE G0/2.
The gateway address for VLAN30 is IP ADDRESS
10.0.0.190 255.255.255.192.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, let’s confirm with a quick show command.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
There are the three gateway address we configured
for each VLAN, looks good.
For step 3, let’s configure SW1’s interfaces.
Go on to the CLI of SW1.
ENABLE.  And then CONFIGURE
TERMINAL.
Okay, now let’s configure the three VLAN10
interfaces at once like this: INTERFACE RANGE
G0/1 COMMA F3/1 COMMA F4/1.
Now we are configuring all three interfaces
at once.
Let’s configure the interfaces as access
ports with this command: SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS
It should enter that mode by default, but
it’s best to manually configure it.
Remember, an access port belongs to a single
VLAN, as opposed to trunk ports which we will
cover in Day 17’s lecture video.
Next, let’s assign the VLAN, SWITCHPORT
ACCESS VLAN 10.
Okay, that’s it.
Let’s go on to VLAN20.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/1 COMMA F5/1 COMMA F6/1.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 20.
Okay, finally let’s do VLAN30.
INTERFACE RANGE G2/1 COMMA F7/1 COMMA F8/1.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 30.
Let’s check it out.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.  Okay, our VLANs were
created and the interfaces were assigned to
the correct VLANs.
But, let’s also change the VLAN names now.
VLAN 10.
NAME ENGINEERING.
VLAN 20.
NAME HR.
VLAN 30.
NAME SALES.
And let’s check once more.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
Okay, the names have been changed.
That’s all for step 3.
Finally let’s test connectivity, I’ll
do some pings from PC1.  Okay, go on to the CLI
of PC1, and first I’ll ping to complete
the ARP process.
Let’s ping to PC3, in VLAN 20
PING 10.0.0.65.  Okay, so we
can reach PC3.
Next, let's ping PC5 in VLAN 30.
PING 10.0.0.129.  Okay, we
can reach PC5 as well.
Now let’s go in simulation mode, and
ping PC3 again.  Okay, let's do that ping.
PING 10.0.0.65.
Okay, so PC1 sends the ping to SW1, then it
goes to R1, then back to SW1, then to PC3,
and the return follows the same path.
So, R1 is doing the inter-vlan routing for
us because it has one interface in each VLAN.
Okay, let’s do one more test.
I’ll ping VLAN10’s broadcast IP, which is 10.0.0.63,
and let’s see if the broadcast only goes
to devices in VLAN10, as it should.
Let’s try.
PING 10.0.0.63.
Okay, there we go, it is sent to SW1, which
then forwards it only to R1 and PC2.
Okay, in this lab we did basic configuration
of access ports on a Cisco switch.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.